Welcome everyone. Again, thank you so much for joining. My name is Isabella Velazquez. I work
on the developer relations team at Posit, been there for almost four years. I have been very
fortunate to work with Quarto for a long time before it was released generally, and I'm really
excited to get to share what I have learned with Quarto with you. And so if you don't mind, I would
love to learn more about you as well. If you would like to share in the chat anything like your name,
your professional affiliation, I'd love to hear what kind of things you produce in terms of
data products, do you create dashboards, do you create reports, and your preferred programming
language. I will say this being R Informa, the exercises that we'll show today are going to be in
R, but everything is also doable in Python as well, and I'm also happy to chat more about that
if anybody is interested. In terms of this workshop, it's going to be, like I just mentioned,
mainly focused on R, and so if you are somebody who works frequently with code with R, creating
things like graphs and tables, and you want to learn about a tool that lets you do that very
seamlessly and create really beautiful outputs, that's what we'll be talking about today.
The beginning part especially is definitely geared towards folks who may be new to Markdown
and Quarto, so if you have some extensive Quarto experience, this might be a bit of review for you,
but I hope to kind of start off everybody in a kind of foundational understanding of what
Quarto is and how to use it. And in terms of what I hope you walk away today with is
this knowledge of Quarto and hopefully an understanding of how you can apply it to your
own work. We'll also be talking a lot about theming documents, so creating styles and themes
that you can apply to your documents so that they match your organizational brand or things like that,
and then, as mentioned, some examples that you could take with you
if you want to go and workshop them further.
And in terms of the structure, if you see a white background like this slide here,
these are going to be the lecture segments where I'm just going to be talking and explaining some
things. You can feel free to, you know, sit back, relax, take notes, or anything like that.
You see a blue slide? This is going to be our turn, so because of how much information that
we'll be covering today, there might be some times where I'll show you how to do something.
If you would like to follow along with the live code, feel free to do so, but absolutely no
pressure. Again, these resources will be available for you so that you could take your time at a
future date. And then, if you see a yellow background, this is going to be your turn.
So, this is where I'm going to turn it over to you so that you can practice the exercises yourself,
and if you have any questions or you run into any issues,
you can feel free to put them in the slides, in the chat.
In terms of the instructions for today, I shared in the chat,
but also available at the bottom of every slide is the workshop website that you can reach there.
If you prefer to follow along with the exercises on your local desktop or laptop,
the exercises are available in a GitHub repository that you can feel free to clone.
We'll talk about this later, but absolutely no pressure. We also have PositCloud as an option
if you would rather do it in a cloud environment so that you don't have to install the packages
and things like that. All right. So, with that, let's get started.
So, today we're going to be talking about Cordo, and if you have not heard of Cordo before,
it's an open source scientific and technical publishing system based on,
built on Pandoc. So, let's break this down. So, open source means that Posit believes it's
better if tools for research are free and open, which means more reproducibility and sharing of
knowledge and techniques and elimination of cost barriers. Scientific and technical means that
Cordo has very specific things for journal articles or scientific papers, like support
for code execution, equations, footnotes, scientific workdowns, citations, and so on.
It's a publishing system, so that means you take output from R, Python, or Julia, or Observable,
you take text written in a markdown, and then you render it to create high-quality articles,
reports, presentations, websites, blogs, books, and so on in a bunch of formats as well,
HTML, PDF, MS Word, EPUB, and more. And the last bit, Pandoc, is the tool working behind the scenes
to change Cordo documents to their final format. And so, it's very rich and it lets you control
your document very, very specifically, while still being easy to read and write.
And so, in summary, with Cordo, you take text, you take code, and you produce something
that you want to share with others, things like documents, and web pages, and blog posts, and books.
And as mentioned, you can do it with a variety of programming languages.
You can do it in your favorite editor. So, today, we'll be primarily working in RStudio,
but if you're a Positron user, VS Code user, you could also use those.
Again, you can publish to a variety of outputs, depending on your needs, or you could do it
multiple outputs at once. Say you want HTML and PDF, you could do that from a single source.
And finally, in terms of publishing it, you can put it on a variety of platforms,
such as PositConnect, or Confluence, or GitHub Pages, and so on.
And so, if you're coming from the R Markdown world, or in general, the world of literate
programming, it's a big and broad world, which mixes narrative and text form with code for
formatted outputs, like these sorts of documents. There are many different kind of literate
programmings that support computation. And so, now there is Cordo. And the huge benefits of this
is being able to create your outputs without having to copy and paste and make any potential
errors in terms of manually changing small steps. You can do a lot of automation with Cordo,
either with or without a programming language, in order to build these really dynamic outputs.
And just really briefly, this is an illustration of how Cordo works. You create a Cordo document,
which has the output QMD. And here, you would write your text, you would write your code,
and then you would render it, which starts the step of sending it to what's called an engine.
If you're using R, you use a NidR engine, similar to R Markdown, or the Jupyter engine for Python
and Julia. That transforms it into a Markdown document, which then also uses that Pandoc
Markdown for really specific things, and then you get your output. But really, the takeaway here is,
I want to mention, from a single QMD file, you can create all sorts of things. I see there's a
lot of buzz in the chat, so I wanted to... Welcome, everyone. Thank you so much for
introducing yourself. It's really nice to meet you. And so, just to kind of sum up in terms of
why would you use Cordo over something else... Sorry, my slides are not progressing. There we
go. Okay. So, the idea of being multilingual is, if you are coming from R Markdown, in order to
work with R Markdown, you need to have R installed. Cordo is inherently multilingual. You don't even
need to have a programming language installed to use Cordo. It comes with batteries included,
so all these kind of formats that we're going to be talking about today, the documents,
the dashboards, the PDFs, and everything come straight out of the box. You don't have to
install anything separate. Consistent expression for core features. So, again, just in case you
are coming from the R Markdown world, there is a variety of different packages that gave
different outputs, and there were slightly different syntax depending on what you wanted
to create, whereas Cordo, as we'll see, has a very consistent expression where across all these
different formats, you just write the similar sort of code or text or syntax, regardless of
the output that you want. So, it makes it a lot easier to work with. An extension system, so both
by Posit and by the community, there are a ton of tools that exist out there to extend Cordo,
to add new features, to add different kinds of styling and templates and things like that,
and it's very incredible the things that people have come up with in order to make Cordo even
better. I mentioned earlier the idea of single source publishing. So, from one QMD document,
you can create .html, .pdf, and so on. And Cordo, the Posit team, the Cordo team at Posit
works really hard to meet accessibility guidelines when developing Cordo, and I feel like you can
really see it when you start creating documents that hopefully meet these accessibility guidelines
as well. And in terms of what you can create with Cordo, you know, I was looking through
the Rforma archives, and I was really impressed. There were already so many really great
presentations about things that folks have done with Cordo. And so, just to pull out a few,
there was an Rforma talk on this, but I also found on the FUSE U.S. CONNECT 2025 archives
is this clinical study report document created using Cordo and Shiny. You can also create
websites. So, for example, this is a tables listing and graphs catalog by the NEST team.
And in addition to their documentation being created with Cordo, I mentioned earlier the
extension system, there is an extension called WebR, which lets you embed executable code within
your documents. So, that means there is a code chunk that anybody can run as long as they have
a browser and an internet connection without needing to have R installed. They just click
run code, and they get the output, which I think is pretty incredible and a great way of adding to
documentation as well. You could create books with Cordo, blogs with Cordo as well. So, this is a
special kind of website that has a listing. You could create presentations like the one that you
see right now, or here's another example, which, again, is really great in terms of adding that
dynamic ability to create different kinds of outputs. Journals. So, if there is a specific
journal that you want to apply to, you could create a Cordo template so that you can write
it in a QMD file with your code and your markdown. When you render it, it gets to the right style for
you. And then a dashboard. This one was presented at PharmaSeg 2024, kind of showing off the
different capabilities that we have to embed data output in a really visually striking format.
So, we'll be talking about quite a few of these outputs in a little bit,
but I just wanted to give you a brief rundown of what's possible.
And, as mentioned, there are specific things that are built for technical documents that Cordo provides.
And, in conclusion, it is a great tool for folks who work with code who need to create output and
want to do that in a very seamless and effective way. So, that is my brief introduction to Cordo.
So, now we can get started. If you want to use Cordo, the first thing that you need to do is
install Cordo. If you have not done this already, there is extensive instructions on the cordo.org
website, which is the documentation website. You can see here, step one, you download the CLI.
So, CLI stands for Command Line Interface. As I mentioned, Cordo is in here.
As I mentioned, Cordo is inherently free of computational systems, so you can run everything
in the terminal in the command line without having to install R or Python. The examples we do have
today do have R, and so that will be required because of the specific examples that we have.
If you use RStudio or Positron, those are actually – they come bundled with Cordo,
and so you do not have to install it separately through that command line interface tool that I
just mentioned. But if you use another editor, like VS Code or Jupyter, then you would need
to go ahead and install it yourself. And so, in terms of your options for today,
we have PositCloud, which is – if you have not worked with it before, it's a cloud
version of RStudio. So, that means that you can use the RStudio IDE in your browser,
on the internet, without having to install it yourself. And one of the benefits of PositCloud
is that it comes – I have pre-installed all the packages that you will need, so hopefully,
you know, you won't have to install anything or run into any, like, missing packages,
errors, or anything like that. So, that is my recommendation if you're able to do that.
But you are also more than free to install locally if you have your own RStudio or IDE
that you want to use, and the instructions will be on the website for the GitHub page – or,
sorry, the GitHub repository to clone. So, it does imply that, you know, a little bit of
Git and version control. So, now I'm going to hand it to you. So, first things first is to go to
this website, which provides everything for today's workshop. Click on the introduction in
the sidebar, scroll down, and there will be setup instructions. So, just to really briefly show you
what that – what I mean, here is the website, here's introduction, and here are the setup
instructions. And if you are – if you run into any issues with PositCloud, please let me know.
We have a couple of different options. And then, also, down here for option two is local
installation, which also walks through the – how to access the workshop materials with the specific
GitHub repository. Please note, if you are doing it locally, that means you will need to install
the packages yourself, and those instructions are available here. And so, I will start the timer,
and I will check the chat. You see, there's a lot about copying and pasting, but
I think what I can do is really quickly update the website.
Okay, I saw that there's a question to today's workshop. So, this website has everything that
you need, and in terms of where the GitHub repository is,
it's linked here in access, the workshop materials.
Hopefully, while everybody is doing that, I also will open up PositCloud.
Here's the link to the website.
And, again, right now, we're under introduction,
recommended setup options. And then, you can just follow the instructions here,
depending on your preference. But if you do have PositCloud open,
it should look just like this. I'll zoom in so it's a little bit easier to see.
One more minute.
Yes, that's right. If you are working in PositCloud, you will need to – you will probably
need to allow pop-ups. Okay, great. I think, yeah, all of you are super on the ball, because the next
step is to go ahead and render a QMD file. And so, I'm going to go ahead and do that now.
So, the next step is to go ahead and render a QMD file. And so, you can go ahead and do that
by opening one up. You can preview and render the document. It will look different depending
on your IDE. And then, you can make a change and preview and render again. So, for example,
I will do it – we can do it together. If you have PositCloud open,
I'm going to open 01 exercise and hit render.
And I already had pop-ups allowed, but you will see what the output looks like there.
As mentioned before, a mix of narrative and code and things like that.
So, maybe I will make it a little shorter. So, this is your turn.
I'll just do a minute and a half so that we can get to the really fun stuff.
The one question is, which code segment handles the logic for expanding or collapsing sections
in the QMD report output? That's a great question, and we'll get to that in the next
section. So, hold tight. But it's called code fold. I'll spell a little bit.
Everybody go ahead, open up the exercise file, and give it a try. If you want, you can edit the
title, preview again, and see how things have changed. I see there's an issue. What error are
you getting trying to open it in PositCloud? Is it a space issue, an installation issue?
Let me know while I move on to the second part.
So, if you are following along on the website – oh, a great question. Is our website showing all
the YAML options? I think I have it linked in the next set of slides, but if not, I can find out.
And so, now we're going to be talking about our documents, where we just first opened up
the first QMD file. We rendered it. We saw what that looked like. So, that is our first QMD file.
And so, we will now talk about, more specifically, what exactly makes up a Cordo document.
And one of those things is the anatomy of a Cordo document.
The anatomy of a Cordo document. So, a QMD file generally has three different components.
The first one is the YAML, as mentioned in the chat. So, this provides the metadata of your
document. So, things like title and author, text, which is the narrative, the things that you write
to explain what to report to your stakeholders. And the third is code, which could be R, Python,
Observable, and Julia. Put them all together, render it, and then you get your beautiful output.
Okay, maybe I don't have it linked. So, we can find the different options, but for the YAML header,
heading, it looks like this. So, it is YAML stands for Yet Another Markup Language,
or YAML into markup language, depending on who you ask. Again, it's the metadata,
things about your document that aren't necessarily in your document, but help you
in terms of how to render it and what you want it to look like. In terms of the syntax,
the YAML header is demarcated by three dashes at the top and the bottom. And then within there
are a set of key value pairs in the form key colon value. So, format would be the key,
HTML would be the value. And so, these are common things like author, subtitle, date,
as well as customization and options like the theme. And so, somebody asked, is there a list
of all the YAML headers? I believe so. So, during the exercise, I'll go through and try to find it.
Oh, thanks, Libby. I think Libby shared in the chat. Much appreciated.
Okay. The next part is going to be your markdown text. So, underneath your YAML header,
the YAML heading is always at the top of your document, is your markdown text. And so, markdown,
if you have not heard of it before, is a lightweight language for formatting text.
And so, very readable, very easy to construct. And Cordo is based on Pandoc and uses a variation
of markdown underneath in that diagram that I showed earlier on. So, an example of how to style
with markdown, if you want italics, you can put asterisks. If you want bold, you can do two
asterisks. And here are a few other examples. And so, within the text in your Cordo document,
you would use this kind of syntax. And when you render it, you get the result where it looks
different, right? Like you would if you were to bold something in Microsoft Word or something like
that. And then, the third part of a Cordo document is the code. And so, highlighted here in lines 10
through 15 is an example of a GT table that takes data and produces a table. And in terms of actually
creating your code chunk, they begin and end with three backticks. Usually, we'll talk about the
usually in a bit. And the code chunks are identified with a programming language in between
those curly braces. And another important thing to note is you can include what are called optional
code chunks inside of your code. I'm sorry, your chunk options in your code chunk that kind of
change how things are rendered when you create your output. So, for example, here on line 11,
you can add a code chunk option with the hash, sorry, the pound sign and then that long dash,
or I'm sorry, line. And here, it says echo is false. So, echo is false means please render this,
but don't show me the code, which is very helpful if you are, for example, presenting your report to
somebody who is not interested in the code and just wants to see the output.
There are a variety of different code chunk options. And so, linked here are the other
execution options if you want to include them in your document or in individual code chunks.
And I mentioned earlier code executable code is usually in code chunks, but you also have another
option of doing inline code, which executes code within Markdown. So, in your Markdown text,
if you do the backtick R and then a value that has been defined earlier, in this case,
P value has been defined as 0.003, and then you can refer to it within your text using that syntax.
And when you render it, what it will output is whatever the value of that object is. So,
in this case, instead of saying P value, it's going to say 0.003. And so, this is very,
very powerful if you are referring to things within your code or within your data in your
narrative so that you don't have to hard code values and update them if your code changes
or if your filters change or your data changes or anything like that.
So, let's give this a try. So, for the first exercise, I would like you to please open
01-exercise.qmd, the same file that you rendered before. Add and include false
chunk option in the first cell. In the YAML, add an author key value pair with author as the key
and your name as the value. Change the code fold to be true. And so, somebody asked earlier,
what is the option for collapsing the code in your rendered document? So, it is called code
fold at the top of your document. And then I would also like you to edit the first paragraph
to make something bold by surrounding a word or a phrase with two asterisks and then use
inline code instead of hard-coded values for the p-value. And I also wrote the code there,
if you would like to see how to do that using R. All right. So, I have five minutes 30. If
everybody feels up for letting me know when they're set, that way I can gauge if we can move
on or should have wait. But all right. For now, I will
add the questions. So, Kamali, to answer your question specifically,
I mentioned there are code chunk options, which you can do within a code chunk itself,
like that echo false option. But you can also set it so that it is the case for your entire document.
So, in this case, I put execute warning false messages false. So, what that means is for every
code chunk, don't show me any messages, don't show me any warnings, which, you know, if you
load the tidyverse, for example, there are a lot of messages that come up.
In addition, you can put different kind of settings for your document, whatever output
that you want. So, here I'm saying give me an HTML document and here code fold is false. So,
that means do not fold the code. But as shown in the exercise, if you set that to true,
now it will collapse the code when you render it. So, give it a shot, you know, preview one
and then change it and then preview it again so that you can see what it looks like.
Can we include a logo in the YAML file? So, we will be talking about logos in a little bit,
but there is a way to include logos in YAML file. Depending on your output, it will look,
it will show up differently, right? Okay. So, one question is can you show something
that we can do in Cordo but not possible in traditional R Markdown HTML documents
for me to get a little better understanding? So, that is a great question. I think probably
one thing that you can do is open up, this is cordo.org, which is the documentation website,
and you can kind of start seeing like the different kind of examples. Like,
you may have noticed it is very similar to R Markdown, but I think once you start getting
into slightly more complex things, it, I think that is really where Cordo starts to shine.
And so, for example, like the built-in sort of things, like building a tab set,
which we will talk about a little bit later, and things like that. Cordo also supports different
kinds of outputs, just out of the box, as I mentioned. So, if you remember in R Markdown,
if you want to create a blog, you have to download blogdown. If you want to create a book,
you have to download bookdown. And then also within blogdown and bookdown and shuriken and so on,
there is slightly different syntax to do the same thing. Like, for example, create a tab set.
I remember in shuriken, it was slightly different. And whereas in Cordo, you can do all of that
in a really, like, using the same syntax. You don't have to change it up or anything like that.
Personally, I really like how Cordo looks out of the box, both, you know, HTML files and
presentations and things like that. We will talk about dashboards and websites a little bit later
as well. And in terms of the different extensions that exist, I think that there is just a lot of
functionality that the community has added to Cordo as well. I don't know. I would love to hear
from the folks, if you have used Cordo before, if you made the switch from R Markdown,
what kind of compelled you to try Cordo and stick with Cordo as well.
One powerful extension that I wanted to add, but I think we would run out of time,
is one called Web R, which, again, lets you create code chunks within your Cordo documents
that people can run without having to download R or open up an ID or anything like that. So,
it's very powerful for teaching and things like that. But I'll think about it a bit more,
because it's a great question. Oh, yes. Olivia has a great point, too. If you do have to use
Python at any point, it is natively working with Python. And so, you don't have to download,
say, Reticulate and work with that. Everything that you see here, if you switch out R with Python
and switch out to R code, Python code, everything would run just as seamlessly. Yeah. Okay. I think
that was the exercise. Thank you all for the great questions.
Let me see if this goes. Okay. So, now let's talk about offering Cordo. And as I mentioned before,
there's specific syntax from Markdown that we can use to do things like create a link,
add images and things like that. You could do things like add tables,
and you can also customize the table widths if you so choose.
Cordo has native support for diagrams. This one is made with something called Mermaid.
And so, it is using the syntax, render it, and you get this diagram.
You could do math mode and the tech within Cordo documents as well,
speaking to that scientific and technical publishing system part that we mentioned earlier.
You can also further customize your documentations using things called div and spans,
which add classes and attributes and other identifiers to customize what your document
looks like. So, for example, this one, if you were to define it, it would add a border for the div.
The second part, whatever class I gave it to the span, when I render it, it will
end up looking like that. So, things like changing the color, things like that.
There are several divs that are built into Cordo. So, for example, a callout box
surrounding some text with these three colons and then callout tip and then curly braces
will result in something that looks like that. So, a really nice and simple way of creating
these kind of looks. You can do things like add multiple columns. In this case, we're saying,
please put an image and some text in two different columns. Rendering it will result in this.
Tab sets, as I mentioned earlier, these are built into Cordo as divs that allow you to
create tab sets. So, here is say your documentation is both in R and Python.
You can have a tab for R and then a tab for Python.
As mentioned, spans allow you to customize small parts of your text. Here, I'm making the text red.
And then also, there is other kinds of spans that allow you to do things like add
alternative text to your images directly within our markdown syntax. So, in this case,
this image now has alternative text. So, that's just like a brief rundown of like if you want
to start working with your document and customizing it, what you can do.
Another big benefit of Cordo is the very variety of the formats that you can do.
So, we've been working primarily with HTML, which are like webpages.
Changing that T value pair in the YAML heading from format HTML to format reveal.js
will transform your document into a reveal.js presentation, which we'll talk about in a little
bit. But essentially, like the slide deck that you're seeing right now is made with format
reveal.js. And again, all I had to do is change the YAML heading to create a presentation.
We'll also be talking about Typed, which is a relatively new tool for creating PDF in a way
that's very, you know, intuitive and follows kind of like the same sort of idea as Cordo,
like a little bit more human readable and things like that compared to some alternatives.
And again, with all of these formats, all you have to do is have Cordo installed. You don't
have to install something for reveal.js or install something for Typed. All you have to do is change
your QMD file. So, to talk very briefly about reveal.js, I just want to kind of introduce like
the idea behind it and the structure so that if you want to go and create your own documents,
you can go do so. But I think reveal.js is super cool. I think it looks really great. It looks
very modern. It's for these presentations that live on the web. It handles code and LaTeX equations
really beautifully. And as I mentioned earlier, you can also include live computations and
interactive content directly in your slides. And then also it has very cool fancy transitions as
well. So, on the left, here we have a basic Cordo document that if you notice in the YAML heading,
renders to HTML. And you can see what it looks like on the right.
Changing HTML to reveal.js, now we get a presentation without having to change anything
within the document itself. And it looks like this. And you may notice the same content is
formatted, but now each level two heading with the two pound signs is its own page now.
Like so.
Sorry, don't want me. There you go.
Okay. Sorry. I'm going too fast.
Okay. You can continue adding multi-level slide structures with single level headings with just
the single pound signs now in the morning. Makes up its own deck. Sorry, its own slide.
And then getting up is its own slide with information underneath.
And you can also use horizontal lines to act as a slide deck.
There is this very cool extension created by one of my colleagues, which allows you to edit slides
in reveal.js like you do in PowerPoint or anything like that. So you can drag and drop text
and images right on the slide preview so that you can reposition and resize them. So it saves a lot
of time from having to manually figure that out yourself. And then it being code first,
it also writes back to your presentation so you can recreate it at a further date.
Okay. And another important thing to know is you can really customize your reveal.js
presentations. And so you can do that manually, like on a presentation by presentation basis,
kind of like this slide deck that you're seeing here. But if you ever find yourself repeatedly
using the same template across multiple presentations, you could create what are
called templates. And we'll talk about templates a little bit later in terms of sharing our branding
and things like that so that other people can or your colleagues or yourself can use that same
formatting without having to recreate everything all over again.
And then the next thing I want to talk about is types. And so as I mentioned,
it's this new open source markup-based typesetting system that is meant to be as powerful
as LaTeX if you ever use LaTeX for building PDFs. And so another alternative for you to
create beautiful professional PDFs. And you can do that within Cordo as well.
And so same sort of functionality as we talked about before, there are different options that
are available to you within the YAML heading that you can change. And then that will change
the look of your rendered output. And then there's all sorts of things that you can do
to continue to tweak your documents. So for example, this is a types block, which adds a
block to change an appearance of a block. So in here, it's filling it with, I think, a certain
color. It's putting a radius around it and slightly rounded corners and so on.
And just like Reveal.js presentations, if there is a particular PDF format that you find yourself
using repeatedly, you can go ahead and create a template that you can reuse over and over.
These are some that are provided by the Cordo team, and the community has also built a lot of
types templates as well. All right, so now let's go ahead and try a few of these things out.
So I mentioned earlier the idea of divs. So the first exercise is to add an important callout box
to that key findings at a glance. And you can see the code here. And then try changing the format,
change it to Reveal.js, change it to types, and then preview and see how things change.
I did add a note. There are those specific formatting options that I put for HTML,
the code fold, the cold summary, and the embed resources. So Reveal.js, because it's for
presentations, it assumes that you don't want to see code. So if you want to see code, you have
to explicitly say, show me the code. And so it's a bit redundant to have – or I'm sorry, like these
won't necessarily work. And then similarly, types is PDF, so it doesn't allow for code folding and
things like that. If you change the format and render, it won't cause any errors. But I do think
in real life, it's probably worth tidying up your documents and removing those so that, you know,
like your document is a bit cleaner and things like that. But for the purposes of this exercise,
you can leave them in. All right, I forgot to add a timer, but I will say let's do
three minutes. And if there are any questions, I will start answering them.
So somebody asked for the link of the materials. So it is linked on the bottom of the slides.
I also am putting it here. And the PositCloud link is on the bottom of this particular slide,
because it's an exercise. Okay, I see there are some really great questions.
One question is, when using WebR, does it load the required packages every time the QMD report
runs or only once before rendering? So there are a few options with WebR. So if you anticipate, say,
like somebody – like you want to get somebody up and running with your WebR document very quickly,
you can pre-install the packages in that, like when they open up their webpage, it will
immediately load all the packages that you'll use for, say, your exercise. So when they run
the code chunk, they can – they will already have it available, kind of like PositCloud.
And so, however, if you would rather, like, have it on an individual basis,
because as you can imagine, pre-installing those packages will – might take a while. Maybe they'll
do things out of order or things like that. It kind of – it works like an R script. You can have
an install packages within your WebR chunk, and then it installs it right then and there. So you
have a variety of options. We have a question, how can I publish Cordo dashboards as a website?
So there is a section on publishing if you want to skip ahead and check it out,
but there are a few different options. So Cordo dashboards, the output, if it doesn't have any
shiny components, is an HTML file. And so you can publish it the same way you can publish
a Cordo website, a Cordo webpage or things like that. Today we're going to be trying out
PositConnect Cloud, which is one option that allows you to – and we'll actually be publishing a Cordo
dashboard too. If your Cordo dashboard has shiny components, then it's slightly different.
It will require a server. So it would need – so PositConnect Cloud also allows you to
deploy shiny apps. You would need something like shinyapps.io or something like that,
or PositConnect if your organization has PositConnect.
But it will be slightly different than if it's just purely HTML.
There's one question, for slides that will be PDFs, is it better to start as HTML than export
as PDF or develop slides with types? I think it probably depends on how you want to present it.
So there is an option, if you see here, to export your Reveal.js slides as PDFs.
I wonder what happens when you click it. So you can see what this looks like.
So, of course, it won't have any of that interactivity that we normally see in the
web-based version, right? But this is something that I can share with my group and things like
that. I would say types is – please, if anybody disagrees with me, let me know. But I think types
is more for, like, PDF documents, like if you are – well, actually, I take that back. There is a very
good types extension. I wonder if I can find it really quickly. That is also for
slides. I'm sorry. If I have a chance, I'll try to find it. So I think it really depends on what
you're interested in. So if you really want to use types and prefer to do it, you could do that.
If you – all you are doing is what I just showed, like you want to just share
a copy of your slides in PDF format, like you could do that through Reveal.js too.
Just running through the questions really fast. Can you do parameterized reports similar to our
markdown? Yes. I think Libby shared some of the resources from J.D. Ryan, who does
really amazing talks on how to use parameters with Cordo. And it's – yeah, it's really,
really impressive, like the sort of projects that she has done and shown with parameters in Cordo.
Okay. If I missed any questions, just let me know. But if not, I wanted to really quickly
talk about dashboards. We just talked about dashboards. I mentioned Shiny Components. So
just to clear that up, this is another format for creating dashboards from Cordo documents.
And the idea, if you've seen a dashboard, is put visualizations and tables and text together.
Releasing Cordo 1.4. So if you don't know what version of Cordo you are on, you can run this
command in the terminal and then find out. And if you have Cordo before 1.4, unfortunately,
dashboards won't work and you'll have to update your Cordo version.
And here are just some examples from the Cordo gallery of different kinds of dashboards that
you can create. The idea of putting rows and columns and value boxes and multiple pages
on a dashboard for your stakeholders. Another example here, we have a sidebar now.
So to provide additional information or to add some inputs or things like that.
You can add interactive leaflet widgets or HTML widgets if you have used that. So
if you visited this dashboard, you can move the map around and zoom in and things like that.
And as I mentioned, you can also use Shiny if you need something within your dashboard to
dynamically change. So in this case, you can filter by different species, by different islands,
and then all the graphs will update based on your filters.
The basic idea is that dashboards are composed of cards. So they're the basic building blocks
of your dashboards. You usually don't have to manually define them. Cordo will just pick them
up. That being said, you probably want them to be displayed in a specific way so you can organize
your content, arrange them into rows and columns. And then you can add additional things to control
the general layout of the page, like additional pages, tab sets, and sidebars for something
that's a bit more advanced. In terms of what this looks like, as you can imagine, you change
the format from HTML, from Reveal.js, whatever you were working with, to dashboard. Here we've added
a plot. When we render it, we don't have to define the card. Cordo will assume that you want that in
its own card. And when rendered, it will end up looking like this. So we have the title at the
top, a single card with our plot. From here, we can continue doing things like adding additional
cards, additional content. So here now we have two code chunks with two different plots.
Rendering that, we will get our two cards. Now we could do things like add a title so that we
can distinguish one plot from the other. So rendered, now we have plot one, plot two,
above their respective plots. And just zooming in, oh no, something happened with my slide.
This is what it looks like. So by default, cards are laid out in rows. So one row plot,
second row plot. And here I have in the YAML heading, just like explicitly defined,
this is the default, but this is what it would look like. But we do have another option. If we
would prefer the orientation to instead be columns, we can change rows to column in the YAML heading.
And when rendered, now our dashboard looks like this. It's up to your personal preference.
We can also use headings to arrange cards. So here we're saying, make a row with these two
plots, a single row with these two plots. And when rendered, it looks like this.
Now let's add two rows. Here I put a row with some text and then the second level heading down
below. And try to imagine what you think this is going to look like. So I'm going to add a
heading down below and try to imagine what you think this will look like when rendered.
And this is what it looks like. So if you notice, it put the text in its own card
and then created a second row with the two original plots.
And from here, we just continue adding to our dashboard to make it look the way that we want.
So here I've added a third plot. So one row with the text, another row with three plots.
You could add columns within our rows if we want to be even more specific.
And so now what we're saying is within this row, make one column with the first two plots,
make another column with the third plot. You can add tab sets to put content in different tabs.
So now those first two plots are within one card, but in two separate tab sets.
And the third plot is in the same row, but not in the tab set.
And so this is what it looks like.
As mentioned, you can continue to customize your layout. If you add a level one heading,
this creates new pages in your dashboard. So now I have page one and then page two.
And then page two. Page one has the first two plots, page two has the third plot.
Looks like that.
You can add logo and buttons to your navigation bar. So there was a question earlier, can we
add logos depending on your output? The answer is yes. This is how you would add it for dashboards.
So here in line five, I've added a logo.
And here I've added navigation buttons to Reddit and GitLab.
And rendering it, we can see what it looks like here. Just to zoom in. Now I have a car logo in
the top left, and I have the GitLab and GitHub icon on the right, top right.
As mentioned, cards have these fundamental units. And so in terms of what it could be,
cards can be text, and it could just be markdown text like we've been writing.
We can also explicitly call something a card by putting this card div around whatever we want.
And in this case, it would be one singular card as opposed to automatically putting them
into different cards.
If you have any text that's at the top of the dashboard,
it's going to be included with no card styling.
You could do things like add JavaScript-based plots like Plotly or just, you know, standard
raster-based plots like ggplot2.
You can also set the size dynamically within the code that you want to use.
You can also set the size dynamically within the code chunk option in the code chunk.
You can also, another card option, so we've talked about text, we've talked about plots,
another one is tables. So now here I have a dashboard with one card that's going to be a
table, another card that's going to be a plot in a single row. And so when rendered, this is what
it looks like in the title up above. Another important component of dashboards are value boxes,
so the really big, you know, displays of numeric number or dates or, you know, some sort of thing
that you really want to call out. You can build that within Cordo dashboards as well
using this div called value box. In this case, I put last updated in a div.
You can also write value boxes within code chunks by defining them as content value box,
and you may want to do this if you want to refer to anything within your code.
So in this case, I am referring to a value within mtcars itself, and therefore I want to use R code
for it. So to do that, I need to do the code chunk, I need to specify that it's a value box,
and then I also have to use this list syntax in order to specify the icon, the color,
and the value of the value box. You don't have to include all those things, but if you want,
you know, your value box to look a specific way, you would add it like so.
So rendered, it looks like this. Just zoom in. Now at the top, I have my value boxes
with the last updated. It hasn't taken a while, and the number of cars, in this case, 32.
And there are different ways to lay out, like, inputs in a dashboard. People often want to
filter, want to click a dropdown, and things like that. You can do that with sidebars.
You can do toolbars for a horizontal panel,
and then also you could do card inputs for card-specific inputs.
But let's just highlight the sidebars for today.
Using that similar sort of syntax of specifying headings for whatever it is that you want,
in this case, I have specified a sidebar using that dot sidebar in the curly braces,
and then everything underneath that is going to be what is contained within the sidebar,
and then the column and the row headings would specify what's in the main body of the dashboard
down here. So rendering this, now we got a dashboard that looks like this
with a sidebar on the left, the main body on the right, and within the sidebar right now,
I just have text. But if you want to add interactivity to your plot, I would say
you can add interactivity to your plots in using things like Plotly and HTML widgets,
which are packages that allow you to do things like create a table that you can filter and things
like that. But if you need your dashboard to be truly dynamic, as in recalculating figures
behind the scenes to show and to render a new plot or things like that, you might have to
consider using Shiny, which if you have not heard of before, is a super powerful, super awesome way
of creating web apps in pure R. There's also a version for Python, so you do it in pure Python,
so you don't have to know like HTML and JavaScript and CSS and things like that.
And this is actually how I primarily build dashboards back when I was building a lot of
dashboards. The only thing is, as I mentioned earlier, there's slightly different deployment
methods for Shiny that you have to consider. In addition, Shiny has its own syntax that you just
kind of have to get familiar with if you're interested in using it. So as mentioned earlier,
a great way of building web apps with R. And within Cordo dashboards, you can include
embedded Shiny components to add that interactivity. So here is our non-interactive
dashboard with a sidebar that's empty and a column with two rows. Here's our sidebar,
and this is what it looks like.
And then down here, we have a plot, which is from the empty cars, which is a built-in data set
showing the miles per gallon. But say, what if I want my stakeholders to be able to switch between
different variables? I want them to be able to look at a horsepower and things like that.
So now I can add my interactive components. So the first thing is, I'm going to add a
component. So the first thing is within the YAML heading, I have to specify that it's server Shiny.
I also have to add this context setup chunk.
If you haven't used Shiny before, this syntax will look familiar. If you have not seen it before,
this is kind of what it looks like. You have to specify for Shiny the UI components. So what
does the person actually see when they open your dashboard? And then the server components,
like what is actually happening in the backend? So in this case, I'm saying create a
way for the user to select a new variable. It's going to say, choose a variable. And then it's
also going to provide the column names from the empty cars data set as the various choices for
the person. And then down below in the main body of the dashboard is going to be the result of that.
So a plot that is going to render based on whatever variable was chosen in the sidebar.
And then I have to explain to Shiny what to do. So in this case,
filter the empty cars to select just that one column and then plot it.
And putting that all together, now we have a dashboard where we have a sidebar with a drop
down. That drop down offers up all of the different options for empty cars. And then
whenever somebody selects a new variable, the plot in the main body gets updated.
So I have added a dashboard.qmd file in the exercises. You can go ahead and render it.
I did change it up a little bit from the original exercise one. If you want to see
what ends up happening if you change the format of that first exercise one, please feel free.
But if you would like to play around with one that's more optimized for the dashboard format,
you could do 01-4.qmd and feel free to change things up. I might lower this a little bit
just so that we can get to the theming, which I think is a pretty fun part of Cordo.
But again, all the resources will be available for you in the future.
So there's a question, is Cordo now supported on Shiny server? If anybody knows the answer,
please let me know. But I have to admit, Peter, I don't know. I will have to check.
One question is, if I change the working directory in one code chunk,
will that change persist for the next code chunk? Or do I need to start again? Oh, Olivia,
I saw that you referenced, or I'm sorry, you answered that. Thank you.
Can Facetwrap be integrated in dashboard? So each section, each will be a section of the dashboard.
I think you might be referring to Facetwrap from ggplot. I don't know if you can do it directly
from a single ggplot plot, but I would say probably what you can do is set up different
cards depending on the different views that you want from your Facetwrap. Alternatively,
you can create a single card that has all of your plot with all of the different wraps that you want.
Another question I don't know, can I set to fit with and hide programmatically
depending on the input? I don't know. Thank you for these great questions. Oh,
somebody's answered. Oh, thank you. I learned something today.
Mm-hmm. So there's a question about relative paths. And so I think, and if you know the sort of
the syntax of like, you know, dot dot returns you to the previous folder and things like that,
you can use that kind of syntax to enter different folders if your images are in different places.
So for example, this Cordo website that we're looking at right now for the workshop,
everything is based on the root directory, but all of the slides and exercises or everything
are in individual projects. So if I want to refer to the images that is in my root directory,
I have to do period period slash and then images slash and then the name of the images. So that
lets Cordo know to go back to the root directory, go to images, and then find that specific image.
So that is definitely possible.
All right. Well, thank you, everybody. So I'm going to talk about projects very,
very quickly so that we can get to, again, the really fun stuff. But the idea behind projects,
is so far we've been working with standalone documents. So a web page, you know, an HTML file,
a dashboard, reveal.js presentation, and the types document. However, sometimes we want to work with
Cordo projects, which I think I just alluded to, the directories, and they provide a way to render
all of your files in a directory with a single command. And so instead of having to render
individual QMD files, you run Cordo render and then the name of your project, and it renders all
of them at once. The nice thing about this is you can share YAML configurations. So in a website,
right, you probably want all your pages to look very similar. And so you can specify that within
a Cordo project so you don't have to copy and paste it across all of your web pages or something
like that. You can redirect outside artifacts to another directory, which you can't do with
standalone documents. And then the ability to freeze. And so this is really great if you have
documents that take a really long time to run. If something hasn't changed, it will automatically
rerun it. There are some things that have to be projects if you want to create them. So a website,
a blog, a book. If you think about it, like they have things that are in reference to each other
and things like that. And therefore, if you want to change, you know, your post into a blog,
then you have to move it into a Cordo project. And so to quickly know whether or not you're
in a project, it's a directory, a folder with files in it that contains a file called underscore
Cordo.yaml. So this is a Cordo project. It's a file directory with underscore Cordo.yaml.
And this one is not because it doesn't have that.
And so this underscore Cordo.yaml file is a yaml file. So again, key value pairs
that give you all sorts of information about your particular project.
So this is the one, for example, for this website with a title and then building it out.
I have specified I want the type to be a website. I can add more metadata like the description
that I want page navigation. And for the page navigation, I can refer to different files
within the contents of the navigation bar. So here I'm saying, you know, look into the 00
introduction folder and make index.qmd the introduction and put that in the navigation bar.
And then down below, you can do things like set freeze to auto. I mentioned that in a bit.
But say echo true. So I want echo to be true throughout my entire project.
So freeze allows you to, you know, specify like re-render these documents, never re-render these
documents, re-render these documents only if something changes within the file. And so the
idea is to make it like a lot quicker to rerun, especially if you're only changing some things.
So if you set freeze as true, it'll never re-render during the project render.
Auto means it will re-render only when the source changes.
So just to show really quickly like what you can do. So in the document that we have been working
on that has been a standalone document, let's say we want to create a project from it. So I'm going
to walk through how to do that. I would say I was trying on PositCloud earlier and couldn't get it
to work quite right. And I think it might be my settings or something like that. But if you have
the, it's my RStudio. If you have the project cloned,
then you should be able to do it in your local environment.
I don't know where I just put my RStudio. I'm so sorry.
Because it's not the instructions again, we'll be here for you at any point. There we go. Okay.
So here is our Rformat Cordo exercises with all the files. So this is the command line interface
in that you have to run it from the terminal. If you've never used the terminal before,
in RStudio and in Positron, there is a tab called Terminal that you can open.
And so here it lets me know I'm in my folder, and I'm going to run that Cordo create project.
Here I can select the type of project that I want. So I'm going to
just do website. I'm going to call it Rformat Workshop.
That was first, it was the directory.
All right. So now it has created a new project with these files. And then if you notice,
sorry about that. Well, in any case, this is how to create a new Cordo project.
So as I mentioned earlier, it's going to be a file directory. It's going to, oh, I put it in there.
Oops, sorry about that. I'm going to go ahead and run that. And then I'm going to create a new
project. So I'm going to go ahead and run that. And then I'm going to go ahead and create a new
directory. It's going to, oh, I put it in there. Oops, sorry about that. There's an underscore
Cordo.yaml file that specifies that it's a website that, you know, what's contained in it.
From here, I can build up that navigation bar. Here it's saying for the HTML format,
use these themes, add a table of contents, and so on. So you would edit this depending on what
you want to create for your website. So I really want to get to theming. But again,
if you are interested in creating a website, a book, a blog, then you need to create a Cordo
project. And that command line interface allows you to do that from the terminal. And then you
can specify what is it that you want to create. Okay. Let me just check for,
oh, yeah, thank you. Thanks for, in terms of an example.
If it's okay, I'll wait to the end. I just want to make sure that we get through the main content.
Okay. So now let's get to the idea of theming. So this is you have created your Cordo document.
It's fantastic. It has code. It has text and everything. But now we want it to look the way
that you would like it to look. So for that, we can add themes through theming your Cordo documents.
There are a few built-in themes. So for HTML, for example, Cordo includes 25 themes from
something called the Bootswatch project. So changing the theme to any of these will automatically
change, once you render, it will automatically change your theme to look whatever the theme
specifies. To do so within your YAML heading, you would add theme and then the name of the
theme that you want. And that is a quick way for you to create a different looking Cordo document
from the default whenever you want. However, there is usually an organizational theme,
you know, for companies, for our, you know, whatever we're working with, that we would
rather use. And so here, for example, is the Art Farmer one. You can see it uses this font
called Source Sans. It has blue headings that are like a little bit bolder. You know, the font
is actually this gray and it's not black and things like that. So what if we want to apply
our organization's theme to our Cordo documents? So there are a few ways of doing this, but the
one I want to introduce today is one called Brand YAML. And the idea behind Brand YAML is a
portable YAML file, and we've been talking about YAML a lot, and it basically codifies your
company's brand guidelines into a format that can be used by Cordo, by Python, by different R tools
to create these branded outputs. And the idea is to support unified branding theme for these tools.
So your web applications, your printer reports, your dashboards, your presentations
would all have a consistent look and feel. Brand YAML is relatively new. Right now it is supported
in Cordo version 1.6 and above for the specific formats of HTML, Dashboard, Reveal.js, and Typed,
all formats that we've talked about, coincidentally. It also is supported in Shiny for Python.
And if you upgrade to BSLib 0.9.0, it's also supported in R Markdown and Shiny for R.
But today we're going to focus on Cordo and Brand YAML. So Cordo offers probably the deepest
integration with Brand YAML. The idea is if you have an underscore brand.yaml file in your project,
Cordo will automatically apply the branding that you've specified across all of these output
formats, Dashboards, Reveal.js, Typed, and HTML, so that you have that brand consistency from that
single file. So in fact, the website and the slides that you see today, they're being formatted
by Brand YAML. In terms of how it works, you create this single underscore brand.yaml file
and you save it in the root directory of your Cordo project. And if it is a project, sorry,
you can also do it for standalone files, but if you have a project, wherever your underscore
cordo.yaml file is, it's also going to be, you want to save it there. This is how Cordo will
automatically detect its presence and then apply the brand to all documents of supported formats
in the project. In terms of what it looks like, it's organized into five key sections. Each one
is kind of like a different building block, but each one is also optional. So you can make this
file as simple or as complex as you need. The first is meta, which is the identifying
information, the metadata of your company, for example. The other one is logos, any logos that you use.
Color, so the colors of your brand guidelines.
And then typography, so the different fonts for the different elements in your documents.
There is also defaults, which allow you to be even more specific about different details. So
this is if you need further customization for your brand.yaml file, but I would say the first four
are probably the most regularly used because they cover like a really wide swath of things.
I would also say brand.yaml is meant to provide like good enough branding, as in it's not going
to be super, super specific. If you need extra customization, we have a section on that that we'll
talk about, and you can definitely do that with Cordo. But for, you know, say getting 80 percent
there, brand.yaml is a great option. So here's my underscore brand.yaml file with my different
elements, just the keys, and then I can start peeking it in. So this is what a populated one
would look like. And so here we define our metadata, our logo, and so on. So here is our meta,
our logo, this is what color looks like, and then typography are the fonts.
And the idea, another idea behind brand.yaml is that it's meant to be like easy to share
and easy to read. So ideally, you know, one of your colleagues picks this up,
they can take a look at your brand.yaml file and kind of understand like, oh, okay,
these are the colors we're going for, here are the fonts, and so on.
Just to really go deep into each of the different sections, so the meta section is for key identity
information. These don't really change, these don't change the visual output of your document,
they're just for reference. So particularly, like say you have different style guides for
different reasons, or your style guide changes over time and things like that,
you can add that information here. So here you have the name and the link,
you could add multiple links if we would like, like our company's social media.
You can continue adding onto this with even more detail to centralize that key brand information.
And if your company like ours has like a long and a short name, you can add that too.
The next section is the logo. So you specify your brand's logo at various sizes,
you can provide just a path to a local file, or you could do a relative one to the brand.yaml file,
or use a URL. So you can add, or I'm sorry, define logos for different contexts, so like
small for tiny displays, the medium one for website headers, and large one for presentations, or so on.
Like so. And brand.yaml also supports dark mode, so if you need different logo versions,
because you want to provide light and dark mode, you can do that as well.
So here's light, here's the dark version.
Excuse me. And then you can continue adding logos, you can also give them like descriptive names,
so that they're a little easier to reference in your documents. So here I have specified the
header logo as header, and then I'm referencing it in my light mode as header without having to
copy and paste that URL. So you can imagine this is very handy if, say, the URL changes,
you just have to change it in one place and not throughout your document.
And you can do things like add alternative text as well, like so.
The next step is color. Probably the part that I find the most fun, and so there are two main parts.
The first part is the palette, where you name colors specific to your brands, so like black,
and then if there's a specific hex code, blue, and so on. And so this way we can reference these
colors by names without having to memorize the hex codes. And again, if, say, your blue changes,
you just have to change it in this one place. And then the second part is where we assigned our
brand colors to the theme colors, so now they have like a role. And Cordo and Shiny would know what
to do with this information. So foreground stands for main text color, and it's going to use black,
and so on. And so you can set different colors for things like warning, and danger, and so on.
And then you can reference that in your documents however you see fit.
You can also give it that name that you define up above in the palette,
or you could just use the hex code too.
So this is the full section, so this is what it ends up looking like if you wrote everything out
with the colors and their roles.
Yes, and you can reference them in the different sections as well. So here, primary is blue,
and blue is that hex code. But you can also just keep it simple if you want. That was probably one
of the more complex examples. And then you can continue adding to have that flexibility later on.
And then the next section is typography, which is fonts and their styles. And
very minimally, you can just do the base font. So for like most of your text,
your heading and monospace, which is anything that looks like code.
And then this one is just like the last one, but it's just a little bit more explicit as to what's
happening. You can do things like add fonts from Google. So here, I'm saying open sounds from
Google, Roboto Slabs from Google, and so on. So that Cordo knows where to find that font if it's
not installed on your computer. And a neat detail is you can also specify bunny. And bunny fonts is
a GDPR compliant alternative to Google Fonts, which if you need that for data compliance
requirements, you can add that. And if you want to add a font, you can do that.
If your brand uses proprietary or custom fonts, you can also include them locally.
So you would set the source to the file and then list each font file with its path.
And so even if they're local, you can add those in brand new as well.
And once they are defined, you can map them to the different text elements. So base is,
for example, the font and appearance for the base or body text. And so that way,
brand YAML knows what to use these different fonts for. Roboto Slabs will be headings and so on.
But you can go even deeper. So say you want to do things like specify text size, line height,
font weight. You can use one or more of your defined theme colors from before to set,
for example, in this slide deck, I have set the dark blue to the heading for these presentations
and so on. So you can really, really keep adding. Another thing I did for this presentation is use
like a heavier weight for the headings. That's why it's a little bit thicker.
And here is an example of referencing the color from up above for your typography.
And just to talk really briefly about default. So there are a ton of BSLib theming variables
that are available. Here's 932 with a ton of options for you. And if there is a specific one,
say you are creating a dashboard with a navigation bar and the default color is white,
for example, and you want it to be blue, the specific blue that's in your brand YAML file,
you can actually go ahead and add that in your brand YAML file. Here I'm saying my default
for the navigation background, which is a bootstrap variable and make it the dark blue
that I had to find up above. It does have the specific syntax of using a dollar sign, brand,
dash, and then the name of your font. But that way, again, if your dark blue changes,
you don't have to change it for your navigation bar. You just have to change it where you have
to find it. And so in terms of using it for Quarto, because of that deep integration,
there are a few things you can do. Like if you're writing a Quarto document and you want to add
your logo somewhere, you can use this short code to do so. So here I've added the Art Farmer logo.
If you have noticed, some of my slides are different colors than others. And for those,
I'm also referencing a color that I specified in the brand YAML file using this syntax,
the background color, which is from Quarto, and then using the short code to say make it
my primary color. And so that way, again, you just define your brand file in one place,
and then you can use it throughout your Quarto documents.
If you don't want to call it brand YAML, underscore brand dot YAML, I mean, the file,
you don't have to. You can change its name, but you would have to refer to it in,
or if it lives in a subdirectory, you would just have to add the brand key to your YAML heading,
so that Quarto knows where to look. And so there's a specific file in your Quarto project
that you're not interested in having with your brand. You can also specify brand as false.
All right. So in the workshop repo, there was secretly a brand YAML file. It's called
03exercises.yaml. Rename it to underscore brand dot YAML, and then re-render your Quarto document.
You know, one thing you can do is you can change the variables in your brand YAML file
and re-render to see how your theme changes. Another thing you can do is, say, change your
format from HTML to Reveal.js to types and re-render so that you can see what it looks
like in different formats as well. All right. So two minutes to do that. I will check the chat.
So one question is, what if the font has to be downloaded first because it's not available in
default? So you can say it's in your Quarto project. Download the – I think it's W-O-F-F
file or the different – you know, the font file. Have it available somewhere, and then you just
specify it in your brand YAML file, the file path to that particular font file. You just have to be
aware if you're sharing your brand with somebody else that they would also need that file if they
want to use that same font. Oh, yes, Libby. Thank you.
For anybody who's just joined us, the workshop
link is down here. We are in the theming section.
This is about wrapping up, too.
The theming section, not the workshop.
Somebody asked, can I change the headers from the main document, too?
If you mean specifically in the brand YAML file, yes. In the typography section, you would specify
what you would want for your headers, like the headers that you see. My slide, for example,
have brand YAML applied to them, and we'll talk in a little bit what if we need even further
customization, like say we want our header one to look different than our header two,
which we'll talk about in a second.
One question is, can we specify colors using HSL or HSB instead of hex? I don't know.
At least all the instances I've seen have been hexed, but I will find out.
It's such a great question. Thank you. How did it go? Was everybody able to change their file to
underscore brand.yaml and re-render?
I hope it changed. Yay, great. Okay. Sorry. I know that my project goes to sleep, so
otherwise I would show you how it looks. Okay, great. Somebody shared earlier, like how can we
publish these, share them with others, so that we don't have to go back and re-publish them again.
We publish these, share them with others. There are a lot of different options in terms of how to
do so. If your Cordo document is a static HTML page, you can host it on anything that can be
deployed to a web server or web host, so GitHub Pages, Cordo Pub, Paws to Connect. These are
very common ones. The ones I want to talk about specifically is Paws to Connect Cloud,
which is, again, another relatively new product from Pawsit that allows you to deploy a variety
of different apps, like R Markdown, Cordo, Shiny, Shiny for Python, Streamline, Dash,
all sorts of things. If you go on the website, I'll show you how to do it. Sorry. It will share
the list of all the different options. Personally, I really like Paws to Connect Cloud. It being
cloud-based, of course, this means that if you need some privacy settings or something like that,
there are different plans available for that. But if it is to openly share something to the
world, like, for example, this workshop website, you can use that as an option as well.
If you want to give it a shot, you can sign up for a free Paws to Connect Cloud account at this URL.
And once you have done that, you can sync with Connect Cloud by running this RSConnect
Connect Cloud user function. And what that will do is pop up a new page. Actually, maybe we'll
just do it together so that way we can move on to the next slide. Because somebody asked,
can we use both brand.yaml and style.css together? Does one take precedence over the other?
The answer is yes. So I'll show that in a second.
Let's see if this allows me. If you want to give it a shot while my project opens up, feel free.
But essentially, this will allow you to, say, deploy that dashboard that you have
been working on to Paws to Connect Cloud. And then you can share it with others.
I might already be authenticated.
And then the next thing I'm doing is running this to deploy the dashboard.
So this is what my dashboard looks like. It's now available in Paws to Connect Cloud.
Here I can change different settings. Like if I want to change the name of it
or if I want to share it, I can copy this link and share it with everybody as well.
So that's one option for publishing. I just wanted to share it. And the ability to publish
directly from our studio is very new. And so I think it's very, very exciting too.
And because we got asked this, I will skip really quick to extra customization. So the question was,
can we use brand.yaml and style.css together? The answer is yes. And so just go through the
slides really quick. As I mentioned earlier, you do have the option of defining light and dark,
both for your fonts – or I'm sorry, for your logos, but also, say, within your color as well.
And so that way, your document, your website, and so on,
would look different depending on how you define it in your brand.yaml.
So there are these variables called sass. Somebody mentioned css. That's an option as well.
So these allow you to really customize and tailor your document depending on what you need.
And so the nice thing about sass is it's a very human-readable sort of way of writing it.
Linked in the bottom are the variety of sass variables that you can edit within Quarto.
But for example, like, say, body background, this is what the sass variable would look like. So I
would add that in my sass file. And then the color that I would want to assign to it. And that's it.
You can do specific fonts. And so code blocks. So here you can add a code block border,
code block background, if you want it to be a different color than the default.
There are a ton of variables. And so when you find yourself really needing to tweak something,
definitely first take a look at the documentation and see if there's a sass variable that controls
that and try to edit it as well. In terms of what your .scss file looks like. So this is where you
would put your sass variables. This file is called styles.scss. At the top, you can define functions.
You can define defaults. And so these are using these sass variables that I just mentioned.
So in this case, I'm saying for heading two, use font size 1.6. You know, for headings,
font weight, use 500 and things like that. So brand yaml is supposed to get you mostly there.
Yes, that's right. Not to be confused with the other sass. Not as stylish.
And so say brand yaml gets you mostly there. But if you need that extra customization,
you can do that in these sass files. And then within rules, you can add like even more things.
So here's specifying all the different headings and that I want to add a text shadow and things
like that. If you just have a sass file, like you don't aren't using brand yaml, you can specify it
in your yaml header in, you know, in your underscore quarter that yaml file or within
individual documents like so. But you can also use it together with brand yaml. So if you're
already using brand yaml, you can use sass to further customize your theme. So like things
that brand yaml is just not able to do, add drop shadows to cards, specify the color of block quotes,
set different header levels to different colors and so on.
So here, for example, they still talk to each other. So within a sass file, you can still
reference things within your brand yaml file. So say, you know, you want your header one to be
the blue from the brand yaml file, the header two to be the green, and you can refer to them like
so. So that way, you don't have to include hex codes or anything like that within your sass file
unless you need to. So to answer the question, in this case, the sass file has priority over
brand yaml. So it will override whatever you have put in your brand yaml file.
But they will, you know, for everything that's not defined in your sass file,
it will defer to your brand yaml file. And so here, you can see, you can change the order.
So in this case, your sass file takes precedence than your brand yaml file,
and then Cosmo, which is a built-in bootstrap theme for Cordo for everything else.
Oh, sorry, I thought I added this, but that being said, you can rearrange this. So say,
you want Cosmo to take precedence over brand, you would just switch them in your order.
Oh, and I mentioned earlier that you can add defaults to your brand yaml file as well.
Okay, so I just wanted to make sure to answer that question. It's a very good one, but yes,
everything should work together. So for example, in these slides, I have a sass file
just for, you know, these little blocks, and everything else is determined by the brand yaml
file. In the last 10 minutes, I just wanted to talk about creating and sharing your brand.
So you have created a brand yaml file. It looks awesome. It looks like, you know, really great.
But then you want to share it with your colleagues, right? There are a few different ways of doing
that. It's a yaml file. So you can, you know, just send it over, you can put it in, if you use
something like GitHub for version control, you can add a creative repository for it,
and share it that way. The benefits of that is if something changes, right, somebody can,
you know, quickly reference like, whatever has changed and use the latest and greatest file.
And since we're creating a brand yaml file, to create any yaml file, you can start off with a
plain text file. In RStudio, you could do file, new file, text file, and then start building it
out from there. The only thing that will make it a yaml file is whatever name you choose,
or the extension you choose, so you can save it as underscore brand.yaml, and then you have a yaml
and then you have a yaml file. If you go to the brand yaml doc site, there is a page with
inspiration, which shows different brand yaml files for different organizations. So if you want
to take a look at posits, for example, and kind of use that as a reference for your own companies,
you can do so. There is also an article on the brand yaml documentation,
if you would like to get help from a large language model. So it provides a prompt that
you can add, or you can give to say, chat2BT, that lets it know like, what is a brand yaml file
and how to structure it. And then you could give it some inspirations and references and things
like that, so that it can help you start building your brand yaml file. And then you'd copy and
paste that into the file that you just created. There is another relatively new thing, lots of
relatively new things. As I mentioned, you could do a shared repository like, or GitHub,
if your company uses Google Drive and things like that to share your brand yaml file.
But in Corda 1.8, there is something called a brand extension. And so this, instead of you
having to go file, new file, you know, open up a file to create an extension, a creative brand yaml
file, you can run Corda create extension brand in the terminal and give it a name. And then it will
provide, you know, all the boilerplate like starting materials for you to create your
brand yaml file. One thing to note though, is right now, brand extensions must be used within
a Corda project. So if you have standalone files, this won't work. But I know the team is working on
alternatives for that. So this is what it looks like. If you run create a Corda brand
extension in the terminal, it's going to populate a folder with all of these files.
And then it's going to ask you where do you want to open this and you can say Positron, VS Code,
RStudio. One of the key files is going to be this underscore extension that yaml file.
And this just lets Corda know, hey, we're using a brand extension. And from here you
could do things like change the author, you know, add any metadata that you need.
And then the other important file is going to give you is this brand.yaml file.
And from here, this is where you start building your brand yaml file.
There is also an examples document. So you can change your brand yaml file and then re-render
that document and see how it looks until you get, you know, exactly what you want.
And then once you publish your brand extension to say GitHub repository,
anybody can add it to their Corda project by running this Corda add command. So say I have
a website, I want to use your brand extension. I would go to the terminal and run Corda add
and then whatever the name of your GitHub repository is and then slash and whatever
the name of your brand extension is. And then that will basically download that folder into
my Corda project. And the next time I re-render my Corda project, it will have all of your branding.
And then any time that you make changes, you, or I'm sorry, if any changes happen to your brand
extension, you can run Corda update and then the name of your brand extension and that will update
it in your project as well. So that way it is always, you know, the latest and greatest.
So I think we have three minutes left. So if you would like to try creating a new brand extension,
I do recommend doing it locally. Otherwise, they'll put it in the folder that you've been
working on. And then you can, you know, try it out, at least start to create your organization's
brand so that you can, you know, hopefully share it with others and use it for your outputs as well.
And so that's all the material I have for today. Happy to take any questions.
That's all the material I have for today. Happy to take any questions with the remaining time,
but if not, again, thank you all so much for being here with me.
Reach out if you have any questions or would like to chat.
Yeah. One more question is, can we write a scientific article with Corda? Most definitely.
Corda has a lot of features specifically for scientific and technical publishing,
like cross-references and math equations and so on.
Yeah. One note is that sometimes your colleagues, you know, don't want to work with code,
don't want to work with Git, you always have to compile QMD to the output. And so definitely
keep an eye out for exciting changes and updates with Cordo and collaborative publishing. I would
say if you don't follow the Cordo.org blog, definitely keep an eye out there,
as well as the main Posit blog for updates. But yeah, definitely stay tuned.
No. Okay. If there are no further questions, I just want to jump in and thank Isabella for
such a fantastic, amazing workshop. It was an incredible amount to cover in two hours,
and we do really, really appreciate it. I'm completely hooked on Corda myself. I've
drunk the Kool-Aid from our markdown. And I'm just amazed at the development in Corda over
the last couple of years. It's been fantastic. I'm really excited to see what's coming.
Yeah, I agree. It's an amazing tool and the team has done amazing work.
Yeah. And for everyone listening, if you haven't tried it yet, check out Corda extensions as well.
What you can do in that is just astronomical. Yeah, that's a great point. There is a great
Cordo extension gallery, if you have seen it. Oh my goodness. I'm trying to find it.
I'm sorry, I use DuckDuckGo and sometimes the results are like this. Here we go.
And it's a really great list of really amazing extensions that you can find and add to Corda
for changing your format, adding features and everything like that. I'm so glad to hear that
you like them too. Okay. Well, once again, thank you so much. We really appreciate it.
The recording will be available in a few weeks. I've also just gone through a few things.
There should be a link in the chat for badges, if you want a badge certificate for attendance.
And just to let people know, there's a couple more workshops this afternoon and then the
conference talks start tomorrow and Asia Pacific talks have already started as from yesterday. So
we've got lots of things going on. And once again, just to thank Isabella for a fantastic workshop.
Thank you so much. And with that, we'll close the bridge. Thank you again.